docs/git-hooks.md, before:

# Git Hooks Documentation

This document describes the Git hooks used in the LotaBots project to maintain code quality, security, and consistency across the codebase.

## Table of Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Pre-commit Hook](#pre-commit-hook)
- [Commit Message Hook](#commit-message-hook)
- [Commit Signature Verification](#commit-signature-verification)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Bypassing Hooks](#bypassing-hooks)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

The LotaBots project uses two primary Git hooks:
1. **pre-commit**: Runs before creating a commit to ensure code quality and security
2. **commit-msg**: Validates commit messages to maintain consistent documentation

## Pre-commit Hook

The pre-commit hook performs the following checks:

### 1. Rust Formatting & Linting
- Runs `cargo fmt` to ensure consistent code style
- Executes `cargo clippy` to catch common mistakes and enforce best practices

### 2. Security Checks
Scans for sensitive data patterns including:

#### API and Authentication
- API keys and secrets
- JWT tokens
- Authentication tokens
- OAuth credentials

#### Cloud Provider Credentials
- AWS (Secret keys, Access keys, Session tokens)
- Azure (Storage keys, Connection strings, AD secrets)
- GCP (API keys, Client secrets, Service account credentials)

#### Database and Cache
- Database URLs and credentials
- Redis connection strings
- PostgreSQL/MongoDB credentials

#### AI/ML Related
- OpenAI API keys
- HuggingFace tokens
- Model access keys
- Anthropic/Cohere keys

### 3. Microservice-Specific Checks
- Validates Cargo.toml version consistency
- Checks for proper error handling:
  - unwrap()/expect() usage
  - panic! macro usage
  - todo! implementations
  - dbg! macro removal

### 4. Configuration and Protocol Checks
- Validates .proto files:
  - Package declarations
  - Syntax version
  - Language-specific options
- Checks configuration files:
  - TOML syntax and required fields
  - YAML/K8s manifest validation
  - JSON structure and required fields

### 5. Documentation Checks
- Ensures public items are documented
- Flags TODO/FIXME comments
- Verifies documentation standards

### 6. Test Coverage
- Runs all tests
- Executes service-specific tests
- Verifies test file existence

## Commit Message Hook

The commit-msg hook enforces the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) specification with LotaBots-specific extensions.

### Format
```
<type>(<scope>): <description>

[optional body]

[optional footer(s)]
```

### Types
1. **Standard Types**
   - feat: New features
   - fix: Bug fixes
   - docs: Documentation changes
   - style: Formatting changes
   - refactor: Code refactoring
   - perf: Performance improvements
   - test: Adding/updating tests
   - build: Build system changes
   - ci: CI configuration changes
   - chore: Maintenance tasks
   - revert: Reverting changes

2. **LotaBots-Specific Types**
   - attestation: Hardware/AI attestation changes
   - document: Document processing features
   - resource: Resource management updates
   - auth: Authentication/authorization changes
   - api: API-related modifications
   - agent: Agent system changes
   - ml: Machine learning components
   - data: Data processing features
   - ui: User interface changes
   - infra: Infrastructure updates
   - hardware: Hardware integration
   - security: Security enhancements
   - monitoring: Monitoring/observability
   - config: Configuration changes
   - db: Database modifications
   - cache: Caching system updates
   - queue: Queue system changes
   - metrics: Metrics/telemetry updates

### Scopes
1. **Core Services**
   - auth, api, agent, attestation, document, resource

2. **Infrastructure**
   - aws, azure, gcp, k8s, docker

3. **Data & ML**
   - ml-pipeline, training, inference, dataset

4. **Monitoring & Observability**
   - metrics, traces, logs, alerts

5. **Storage & Caching**
   - postgres, redis, s3, cache

6. **Security & Compliance**
   - audit, compliance, encryption, secrets

### Examples
```bash
feat(auth): implement JWT token refresh
fix(attestation): resolve hardware verification timeout
perf(ml-pipeline): optimize model inference
security(encryption): update TLS configuration
```

## Commit Signature Verification

LotaBots requires all commits to be signed for security and authenticity. We support three methods of signing:

### 1. GPG Signing (Recommended)
```bash
# Check for existing GPG keys
gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format=long

# Generate a new GPG key if needed
gpg --full-generate-key

# Add your GPG key to GitHub
gpg --armor --export YOUR_KEY_ID

# Configure Git to use your GPG key
git config --global user.signingkey YOUR_KEY_ID
git config --global commit.gpgsign true

# Sign commits automatically
git commit -S -m "your commit message"
```

### 2. SSH Signing (Alternative)
```bash
# Use existing SSH key or generate new one
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "your_email@example.com"

# Add SSH key to GitHub as a signing key
# Copy your public key and add it in GitHub settings

# Configure Git to use SSH signing
git config --global gpg.format ssh
git config --global user.signingkey ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub

# Sign commits automatically
git commit -S -m "your commit message"
```

### 3. S/MIME Signing (For Organizations)
- Use X.509 key issued by your organization
- Configure Git to use S/MIME:
  ```bash
  git config --global gpg.x509.program smimesign
  git config --global gpg.format x509
  ```

### Verification Status
Commits will show one of these statuses on GitHub:
- **Verified**: Signature is valid and verified
- **Partially verified**: Valid signature but multiple authors
- **Unverified**: Invalid or missing signature

### Best Practices
1. **Key Security**
   - Store private keys securely
   - Use strong passphrases
   - Rotate keys periodically
   - Revoke compromised keys immediately

2. **Automation**
   - Configure signing in CI/CD pipelines
   - Use environment-specific keys
   - Verify signatures in pre-receive hooks

3. **Emergency Procedures**
   - Document key recovery process
   - Maintain backup signing keys
   - Define revocation procedures

### Troubleshooting Signatures
1. **Invalid Signatures**
   - Verify key configuration
   - Check key expiration
   - Ensure key is added to GitHub
   - Validate email matches Git config

2. **CI/CD Issues**
   - Configure bot signing
   - Use appropriate key types
   - Set correct environment variables

3. **Common Errors**
   ```bash
   # Fix "secret key not available"
   gpg --receive-keys KEY_ID

   # Fix "failed to sign the data"
   echo "test" | gpg --clearsign

   # Fix SSH signing issues
   ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
   ```

## Installation

The hooks are automatically installed in the `.git/hooks` directory. To manually install or update:

```bash
# Make hooks executable
chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit
chmod +x .git/hooks/commit-msg
```

## Bypassing Hooks

In rare cases, you may need to bypass the hooks:

```bash
# Bypass pre-commit hook
git commit --no-verify -m "your message"

# Bypass both hooks
git commit --no-verify --allow-empty-message -m "your message"
```

⚠️ **Warning**: Only bypass hooks when absolutely necessary and you understand the implications.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Security Check Failures**
   - Check for hardcoded credentials
   - Use environment variables or secure vaults
   - Remove debug/test credentials

2. **Commit Message Format**
   - Ensure type and scope are valid
   - Use imperative mood in descriptions
   - Keep lines under 100 characters
   - Reference issue numbers (e.g., LOTA-123)

3. **Configuration Validation**
   - Verify YAML/JSON syntax
   - Include required fields
   - Follow language-specific conventions

4. **Test Failures**
   - Run tests locally before committing
   - Check service-specific test suites
   - Ensure test files exist for new code

### Getting Help

For additional assistance:
1. Check the error messages for specific guidance
2. Review this documentation
3. Contact the development team
4. File an issue in the repository

Commit message:

feat(git): add automated commit signing setup script
- Create interactive setup script for GPG, SSH, and S/MIME signing

- Add script documentation to git-hooks.md

- Update quick reference in README.md

LOTA-123

docs/git-hooks.md, after:

# Git Hooks Documentation

This document describes the Git hooks used in the LotaBots project to maintain code quality, security, and consistency across the codebase.

## Table of Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Pre-commit Hook](#pre-commit-hook)
- [Commit Message Hook](#commit-message-hook)
- [Commit Signature Verification](#commit-signature-verification)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Bypassing Hooks](#bypassing-hooks)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

The LotaBots project uses two primary Git hooks:
1. **pre-commit**: Runs before creating a commit to ensure code quality and security
2. **commit-msg**: Validates commit messages to maintain consistent documentation

## Pre-commit Hook

The pre-commit hook performs the following checks:

### 1. Rust Formatting & Linting
- Runs `cargo fmt` to ensure consistent code style
- Executes `cargo clippy` to catch common mistakes and enforce best practices

### 2. Security Checks
Scans for sensitive data patterns including:

#### API and Authentication
- API keys and secrets
- JWT tokens
- Authentication tokens
- OAuth credentials

#### Cloud Provider Credentials
- AWS (Secret keys, Access keys, Session tokens)
- Azure (Storage keys, Connection strings, AD secrets)
- GCP (API keys, Client secrets, Service account credentials)

#### Database and Cache
- Database URLs and credentials
- Redis connection strings
- PostgreSQL/MongoDB credentials

#### AI/ML Related
- OpenAI API keys
- HuggingFace tokens
- Model access keys
- Anthropic/Cohere keys

### 3. Microservice-Specific Checks
- Validates Cargo.toml version consistency
- Checks for proper error handling:
  - unwrap()/expect() usage
  - panic! macro usage
  - todo! implementations
  - dbg! macro removal

### 4. Configuration and Protocol Checks
- Validates .proto files:
  - Package declarations
  - Syntax version
  - Language-specific options
- Checks configuration files:
  - TOML syntax and required fields
  - YAML/K8s manifest validation
  - JSON structure and required fields

### 5. Documentation Checks
- Ensures public items are documented
- Flags TODO/FIXME comments
- Verifies documentation standards

### 6. Test Coverage
- Runs all tests
- Executes service-specific tests
- Verifies test file existence

## Commit Message Hook

The commit-msg hook enforces the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) specification with LotaBots-specific extensions.

### Format
```
<type>(<scope>): <description>

[optional body]

[optional footer(s)]
```

### Types
1. **Standard Types**
   - feat: New features
   - fix: Bug fixes
   - docs: Documentation changes
   - style: Formatting changes
   - refactor: Code refactoring
   - perf: Performance improvements
   - test: Adding/updating tests
   - build: Build system changes
   - ci: CI configuration changes
   - chore: Maintenance tasks
   - revert: Reverting changes

2. **LotaBots-Specific Types**
   - attestation: Hardware/AI attestation changes
   - document: Document processing features
   - resource: Resource management updates
   - auth: Authentication/authorization changes
   - api: API-related modifications
   - agent: Agent system changes
   - ml: Machine learning components
   - data: Data processing features
   - ui: User interface changes
   - infra: Infrastructure updates
   - hardware: Hardware integration
   - security: Security enhancements
   - monitoring: Monitoring/observability
   - config: Configuration changes
   - db: Database modifications
   - cache: Caching system updates
   - queue: Queue system changes
   - metrics: Metrics/telemetry updates

### Scopes
1. **Core Services**
   - auth, api, agent, attestation, document, resource

2. **Infrastructure**
   - aws, azure, gcp, k8s, docker

3. **Data & ML**
   - ml-pipeline, training, inference, dataset

4. **Monitoring & Observability**
   - metrics, traces, logs, alerts

5. **Storage & Caching**
   - postgres, redis, s3, cache

6. **Security & Compliance**
   - audit, compliance, encryption, secrets

### Examples
```bash
feat(auth): implement JWT token refresh
fix(attestation): resolve hardware verification timeout
perf(ml-pipeline): optimize model inference
security(encryption): update TLS configuration
```

## Commit Signature Verification

LotaBots requires all commits to be signed for security and authenticity. We support three methods of signing:

### Quick Setup
The fastest way to set up commit signing is to use our automated setup script:

```bash
# Run the interactive setup script
./scripts/setup-git-signing.sh
```

The script will:
1. Guide you through choosing a signing method
2. Check for required dependencies
3. Set up new keys or use existing ones
4. Configure Git automatically
5. Display your public key for GitHub

For manual setup, follow the instructions below for your preferred method:

### 1. GPG Signing (Recommended)
```bash
# Check for existing GPG keys
gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format=long

# Generate a new GPG key if needed
gpg --full-generate-key

# Add your GPG key to GitHub
gpg --armor --export YOUR_KEY_ID

# Configure Git to use your GPG key
git config --global user.signingkey YOUR_KEY_ID
git config --global commit.gpgsign true

# Sign commits automatically
git commit -S -m "your commit message"
```

### 2. SSH Signing (Alternative)
```bash
# Use existing SSH key or generate new one
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "your_email@example.com"

# Add SSH key to GitHub as a signing key
# Copy your public key and add it in GitHub settings

# Configure Git to use SSH signing
git config --global gpg.format ssh
git config --global user.signingkey ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub

# Sign commits automatically
git commit -S -m "your commit message"
```

### 3. S/MIME Signing (For Organizations)
- Use X.509 key issued by your organization
- Configure Git to use S/MIME:
  ```bash
  git config --global gpg.x509.program smimesign
  git config --global gpg.format x509
  ```

### Verification Status
Commits will show one of these statuses on GitHub:
- **Verified**: Signature is valid and verified
- **Partially verified**: Valid signature but multiple authors
- **Unverified**: Invalid or missing signature

### Best Practices
1. **Key Security**
   - Store private keys securely
   - Use strong passphrases
   - Rotate keys periodically
   - Revoke compromised keys immediately

2. **Automation**
   - Configure signing in CI/CD pipelines
   - Use environment-specific keys
   - Verify signatures in pre-receive hooks

3. **Emergency Procedures**
   - Document key recovery process
   - Maintain backup signing keys
   - Define revocation procedures

### Troubleshooting Signatures
1. **Invalid Signatures**
   - Verify key configuration
   - Check key expiration
   - Ensure key is added to GitHub
   - Validate email matches Git config

2. **CI/CD Issues**
   - Configure bot signing
   - Use appropriate key types
   - Set correct environment variables

3. **Common Errors**
   ```bash
   # Fix "secret key not available"
   gpg --receive-keys KEY_ID

   # Fix "failed to sign the data"
   echo "test" | gpg --clearsign

   # Fix SSH signing issues
   ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
   ```

## Installation

The hooks are automatically installed in the `.git/hooks` directory. To manually install or update:

```bash
# Make hooks executable
chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit
chmod +x .git/hooks/commit-msg
```

## Bypassing Hooks

In rare cases, you may need to bypass the hooks:

```bash
# Bypass pre-commit hook
git commit --no-verify -m "your message"

# Bypass both hooks
git commit --no-verify --allow-empty-message -m "your message"
```

⚠️ **Warning**: Only bypass hooks when absolutely necessary and you understand the implications.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Security Check Failures**
   - Check for hardcoded credentials
   - Use environment variables or secure vaults
   - Remove debug/test credentials

2. **Commit Message Format**
   - Ensure type and scope are valid
   - Use imperative mood in descriptions
   - Keep lines under 100 characters
   - Reference issue numbers (e.g., LOTA-123)

3. **Configuration Validation**
   - Verify YAML/JSON syntax
   - Include required fields
   - Follow language-specific conventions

4. **Test Failures**
   - Run tests locally before committing
   - Check service-specific test suites
   - Ensure test files exist for new code

### Getting Help

For additional assistance:
1. Check the error messages for specific guidance
2. Review this documentation
3. Contact the development team
4. File an issue in the repository
